README.md, before:

# glazed - Output structured data in a variety of formats

![](https://img.shields.io/github/license/go-go-golems/glazed)
![](https://img.shields.io/github/actions/workflow/status/go-go-golems/glazed/push.yml?branch=main)

> Add the icing to your structured data!

Glazed is a library that makes it easy to output structured data.
When programming, we have a rich understanding of the data we are working with,
yet when we output it to the user, we are forced to use a flat, unstructured format.

It tries to implement some of the ideas listed in
[14 great tips to make amazing command line applications](https://dev.to/wesen/14-great-tips-to-make-amazing-cli-applications-3gp3).

It is in early alpha, and will change. Contributions are welcome,
but this project is going to be an experimental playground for a while,
while I try to figure out what is possible and worth tackling.

![Command line recording of the functionality described in "Features"](https://imgur.com/ZEtdLes.gif)

## Features

With glazed, you can output object and table data in a rich variety of ways:

- as human-readable tables

```
+ glaze json misc/test-data/1.json misc/test-data/2.json misc/test-data/3.json
+-----+-----+------------+-----+-----+
| a   | b   | c          | d.e | d.f |
+-----+-----+------------+-----+-----+
| 1   | 2   | [3 4 5]    | 6   | 7   |
| 10  | 20  | [30 40 50] | 60  | 70  |
| 100 | 200 | [300]      |     |     |
+-----+-----+------------+-----+-----+
```

- as CSV/TSV

```
+ glaze json misc/test-data/1.json misc/test-data/2.json misc/test-data/3.json --output csv
a,b,c,d.e,d.f
1,2,[3 4 5],6,7
10,20,[30 40 50],60,70
100,200,[300],,
```

- as markdown

```
+ glaze json misc/test-data/1.json misc/test-data/2.json misc/test-data/3.json --table-format markdown
+ glow -


   A  │  B  │     C      │ D E │ D F
──────┼─────┼────────────┼─────┼──────
    1 │   2 │ [3 4 5]    │   6 │   7
   10 │  20 │ [30 40 50] │  60 │  70
  100 │ 200 │ [300]      │     │
```

- as JSON

```
+ glaze json misc/test-data/2.json --output json
[
  {
    "a": 10,
    "b": 20,
    "c": [
      30,
      40,
      50
    ],
    "d": {
      "e": 60,
      "f": 70
    }
  }
]
```

You can flatten fields (happens by default when outputting to a table)

```
+ glaze json misc/test-data/2.json --output json --flatten
[
  {
    "a": 10,
    "b": 20,
    "c": [
      30,
      40,
      50
    ],
    "d.e": 60,
    "d.f": 70
  }
```

- as YAML
``` 
+ glaze json --output yaml ./misc/test-data/1.json
- a: 1
  b: 2
  c:
    - 3
    - 4
    - 5
  d:
    e: 6
    f: 7

```

You can select and reorder fields:

```
+ glaze json misc/test-data/1.json misc/test-data/2.json misc/test-data/3.json --fields c,b,a --table-format markdown
+ glow -

      C      │  B  │  A
─────────────┼─────┼──────
  [3 4 5]    │   2 │   1
  [30 40 50] │  20 │  10
  [300]      │ 200 │ 100
```

You can filter out fields:

```
+ glaze json misc/test-data/1.json misc/test-data/2.json misc/test-data/3.json --filter d.e
+-----+-----+------------+-----+
| a   | b   | c          | d.f |
+-----+-----+------------+-----+
| 1   | 2   | [3 4 5]    | 7   |
| 10  | 20  | [30 40 50] | 70  |
| 100 | 200 | [300]      |     |
+-----+-----+------------+-----+
```

You can rename columns, using both simple string replacement or
more advanced regexp matching:

```
+ glaze yaml misc/test-data/test.yaml --input-is-array --rename baz:blop,d.e:dang
+-----+------+-----+------+-----+---------+
| bar | blop | d.f | dang | foo | foobar  |
+-----+------+-----+------+-----+---------+
| 7   | 2    | 7   | 6    | 1   | [3 4 5] |
| 70  | 20   | 70  | 60   | 10  |         |
|     | 200  |     |      |     | [300]   |
+-----+------+-----+------+-----+---------+
```

```
+ glaze yaml misc/test-data/test.yaml --input-is-array \
  --rename-regexp '^(.*)bar:${1}blop','b..:blip'
+------+------+-----+-----+-----+---------+
| blip | blop | d.e | d.f | foo | fooblop |
+------+------+-----+-----+-----+---------+
| 2    | 7    | 6   | 7   | 1   | [3 4 5] |
| 20   | 70   | 60  | 70  | 10  |         |
| 200  |      |     |     |     | [300]   |
+------+------+-----+-----+-----+---------+
```

- use go templates to customize output

You can use go templates to either create a new field (called _0 per default). 
Per default, the templates are applied at the input level, when rows
are actually still full blown objects (if reading in from JSON for example).

```
❯ glaze json misc/test-data/[123].json --template '{{.a}}-{{.b}}: {{.d.f}}'

+---------------------+
| _0                  |
+---------------------+
| 1-2: 7              |
| 10-20: 70           |
| 100-200: <no value> |
+---------------------+
```

You can also apply templates at the row level, once the input has been flattened.
In this case, because flattened columns contain the symbol `.`, fields get renamed 
to use the symbol `_` as a separator.

``` 
❯ glaze json misc/test-data/[123].json --template '{{.a}}-{{.b}}: {{.d_f}}' \
  --use-row-templates --fields a,_0 \
  --output csv
a,_0
1,1-2: 7
10,10-20: 70
100,100-200: <no value>
```

Instead of just adding / replacing everything with a single field `_0`, you
can also specify multiple templates using the `--template-field` argument, which has 
the form `COLNAME:TEMPLATE`.

``` 
❯ glaze json misc/test-data/[123].json \
    --template-field 'foo:{{.a}}-{{.b}},bar:{{.d_f}}' \
    --use-row-templates --fields a,foo,bar
+-----+---------+------------+
| a   | foo     | bar        |
+-----+---------+------------+
| 1   | 1-2     | 7          |
| 10  | 10-20   | 70         |
| 100 | 100-200 | <no value> |
+-----+---------+------------+
```

To make things a bit more readable, especially when doing a lot of template transformations,
you can also load field templates from a yaml file using the `@` symbol.

``` 
❯ glaze json misc/test-data/[123].json \
    --template-field '@misc/template-field-object.yaml' \
    --output json
[
  {
    "barbaz": "6 - 7",
    "foobar": "1"
  },
  {
    "barbaz": "60 - 70",
    "foobar": "10"
  },
  {
    "barbaz": "\u003cno value\u003e - \u003cno value\u003e",
    "foobar": "100"
  }
]
```

- output individual objects or rows as separate files

Glazed provides a variety of "middlewares" with which you can:

- flatten nested objects into rows
- create new fields based on go templates
- filter and reorder columns

```go
of := formatters.NewCSVOutputFormatter()

of.AddTableMiddleware(middlewares.NewFlattenObjectMiddleware())
of.AddTableMiddleware(middlewares.NewFieldsFilterMiddleware(
	[]string{"a", "b"},
	[]string{"c"}
)

for _, obj := range objects {
	of.AddRow(&types.SimpleRow{Hash: obj})
}

s, err := of.Output()
fmt.Println(s)
```

For easy integration into your own tools, glazed provides:

- a simple API for:
  - input processors
  - row and object middlewares
  - output formatters
- bindings and helpers for:
  - go command-line flag parsing
  - cobra and viper libraries
  - YAML driven configuration

Glazed also comes with the glaze tool which can be use for simple data manipulation
and rich terminal output, leveraging the glazed library.

## Getting started

### Using the glaze command line tool

First, [install the glaze tool](#Installation).

- Show 4-5 cool examples

### Developing with glazed

Write a tiny command line tool:
- if CLI flags can be set up quickly, do that
- generate a random table
- output it using glazed

## Examples

### Output formats

- json [x]
- yaml - #19
- csv [x]
- ascii [x]
- markdown [x]
- html [x]

### File output

- Single file output - #4
- Multi file output - #4

### Flattening structures

- json to rows

### Filtering columns

- filters and fields

### Go template support

- single string template
- multi file templates
- field templates

### Markdown output and templating

- Multi markdown template output with index page
- markdown template file

### Configuration file

- some examples

### Schema documentation

- show how to output schema

## Using glaze as a library

### Middlewares

- ObjectMiddleware
- RowMiddleware
- TableMiddleware

### Formatters

- TableOutputFormatter
- CsvOutputFormatter

### Command Line Integration

- cobra integration [x]
- golang flags - #3
- add support for configuring command line flags (enable / disable / rename)
- viper integration
- calibrate from config files - #17

### Schema documentation

- show how to load different schemas

## The glaze tool

### Installation

Run the `glaze` CLI by using `go run ./cmd/glaze`.

### Import formats

- json / json rows / multiple files - #13
- yaml / multiple files - #14
- csv - #15
- cut / ascii - #16
- sqlite / SQL - #20
- binary parser

### Output flags

## Current RFCs

I keep a list of the current planned features as RFC documents.

- [01 - Flag helpers](doc/rfcs/drafts/01_2022-11-13_flag-helpers.md)
- [02 - Multi-file output](doc/rfcs/drafts/02_2022-11-13_multi-file-output.md)
- [03 - SQLite output](doc/rfcs/drafts/03_2022-11-13_sqlite-output.md)
- [04 - Configuration files](doc/rfcs/drafts/04_2022-11-13_configuration-file.md)
- [05 - Glaze CLI tool](doc/rfcs/done/05_2022-11-19_glaze-cli-tool.md)

## General brainstorm

- documentation for each subsystem

## Future ideas

### Glaze CLI

#### UX

- table app that can hide/show/rename/reorder columns
- markdown rendering with glow - #21
- style aliases (like pretty=oneline for git)
  - maybe styles can also have additional parameters
- sparklines and other shenanigans

#### File Formats

- add support for arbitrary input / output SQL
- add support for inputting binary data and providing a parser
- add support for pcap input
- add support for excel input
- parquet format (and pandas? numpy?)
- excel export
  - annotate excel export with as much metadata as possible

#### Transformation

- add jq support
- search engine  / autocompletion based on known schema
  - use query language to create hyperlinks in output

#### Misc glaze features

- add support for pushing to cloud resources
  - dynamodb
  - S3
  - SQL connectors (see arbitrary input / output SQL)
- add support for serving over HTTP
  - API server to render local data
  - HTML frontend
- serve a local SQL database? meh...
  - useful if you want the user to modify the DB? why not just output sqlite
- cloud / network API output forms, for example to store something in s3 or other databases
  - SQL
  - dynamodb
  - s3
- do we want some kind of transformation DSL / configuration DSL to do
  more complicated things? Definitely not at first, before having the use case for it.
- hyperlinked schema definitions
- collect metadata and event logs to what led to the creation of the data itself

Commit message:

Document how the glazed command middleware system works

README.md, after:

# glazed - Output structured data in a variety of formats

![](https://img.shields.io/github/license/go-go-golems/glazed)
![](https://img.shields.io/github/actions/workflow/status/go-go-golems/glazed/push.yml?branch=main)

> Add the icing to your structured data!

Glazed is a library that makes it easy to output structured data.
When programming, we have a rich understanding of the data we are working with,
yet when we output it to the user, we are forced to use a flat, unstructured format.

It tries to implement some of the ideas listed in
[14 great tips to make amazing command line applications](https://dev.to/wesen/14-great-tips-to-make-amazing-cli-applications-3gp3).

It is in early alpha, and will change. Contributions are welcome,
but this project is going to be an experimental playground for a while,
while I try to figure out what is possible and worth tackling.

![Command line recording of the functionality described in "Features"](https://imgur.com/ZEtdLes.gif)

## Features

With glazed, you can output object and table data in a rich variety of ways:

- as human-readable tables

```
+ glaze json misc/test-data/1.json misc/test-data/2.json misc/test-data/3.json
+-----+-----+------------+-----+-----+
| a   | b   | c          | d.e | d.f |
+-----+-----+------------+-----+-----+
| 1   | 2   | [3 4 5]    | 6   | 7   |
| 10  | 20  | [30 40 50] | 60  | 70  |
| 100 | 200 | [300]      |     |     |
+-----+-----+------------+-----+-----+
```

- as CSV/TSV

```
+ glaze json misc/test-data/1.json misc/test-data/2.json misc/test-data/3.json --output csv
a,b,c,d.e,d.f
1,2,[3 4 5],6,7
10,20,[30 40 50],60,70
100,200,[300],,
```

- as markdown

```
+ glaze json misc/test-data/1.json misc/test-data/2.json misc/test-data/3.json --table-format markdown
+ glow -


   A  │  B  │     C      │ D E │ D F
──────┼─────┼────────────┼─────┼──────
    1 │   2 │ [3 4 5]    │   6 │   7
   10 │  20 │ [30 40 50] │  60 │  70
  100 │ 200 │ [300]      │     │
```

- as JSON

```
+ glaze json misc/test-data/2.json --output json
[
  {
    "a": 10,
    "b": 20,
    "c": [
      30,
      40,
      50
    ],
    "d": {
      "e": 60,
      "f": 70
    }
  }
]
```

You can flatten fields (happens by default when outputting to a table)

```
+ glaze json misc/test-data/2.json --output json --flatten
[
  {
    "a": 10,
    "b": 20,
    "c": [
      30,
      40,
      50
    ],
    "d.e": 60,
    "d.f": 70
  }
```

- as YAML
``` 
+ glaze json --output yaml ./misc/test-data/1.json
- a: 1
  b: 2
  c:
    - 3
    - 4
    - 5
  d:
    e: 6
    f: 7

```

You can select and reorder fields:

```
+ glaze json misc/test-data/1.json misc/test-data/2.json misc/test-data/3.json --fields c,b,a --table-format markdown
+ glow -

      C      │  B  │  A
─────────────┼─────┼──────
  [3 4 5]    │   2 │   1
  [30 40 50] │  20 │  10
  [300]      │ 200 │ 100
```

You can filter out fields:

```
+ glaze json misc/test-data/1.json misc/test-data/2.json misc/test-data/3.json --filter d.e
+-----+-----+------------+-----+
| a   | b   | c          | d.f |
+-----+-----+------------+-----+
| 1   | 2   | [3 4 5]    | 7   |
| 10  | 20  | [30 40 50] | 70  |
| 100 | 200 | [300]      |     |
+-----+-----+------------+-----+
```

You can rename columns, using both simple string replacement or
more advanced regexp matching:

```
+ glaze yaml misc/test-data/test.yaml --input-is-array --rename baz:blop,d.e:dang
+-----+------+-----+------+-----+---------+
| bar | blop | d.f | dang | foo | foobar  |
+-----+------+-----+------+-----+---------+
| 7   | 2    | 7   | 6    | 1   | [3 4 5] |
| 70  | 20   | 70  | 60   | 10  |         |
|     | 200  |     |      |     | [300]   |
+-----+------+-----+------+-----+---------+
```

```
+ glaze yaml misc/test-data/test.yaml --input-is-array \
  --rename-regexp '^(.*)bar:${1}blop','b..:blip'
+------+------+-----+-----+-----+---------+
| blip | blop | d.e | d.f | foo | fooblop |
+------+------+-----+-----+-----+---------+
| 2    | 7    | 6   | 7   | 1   | [3 4 5] |
| 20   | 70   | 60  | 70  | 10  |         |
| 200  |      |     |     |     | [300]   |
+------+------+-----+-----+-----+---------+
```

- use go templates to customize output

You can use go templates to either create a new field (called _0 per default). 
Per default, the templates are applied at the input level, when rows
are actually still full blown objects (if reading in from JSON for example).

```
❯ glaze json misc/test-data/[123].json --template '{{.a}}-{{.b}}: {{.d.f}}'

+---------------------+
| _0                  |
+---------------------+
| 1-2: 7              |
| 10-20: 70           |
| 100-200: <no value> |
+---------------------+
```

You can also apply templates at the row level, once the input has been flattened.
In this case, because flattened columns contain the symbol `.`, fields get renamed 
to use the symbol `_` as a separator.

``` 
❯ glaze json misc/test-data/[123].json --template '{{.a}}-{{.b}}: {{.d_f}}' \
  --use-row-templates --fields a,_0 \
  --output csv
a,_0
1,1-2: 7
10,10-20: 70
100,100-200: <no value>
```

Instead of just adding / replacing everything with a single field `_0`, you
can also specify multiple templates using the `--template-field` argument, which has 
the form `COLNAME:TEMPLATE`.

``` 
❯ glaze json misc/test-data/[123].json \
    --template-field 'foo:{{.a}}-{{.b}},bar:{{.d_f}}' \
    --use-row-templates --fields a,foo,bar
+-----+---------+------------+
| a   | foo     | bar        |
+-----+---------+------------+
| 1   | 1-2     | 7          |
| 10  | 10-20   | 70         |
| 100 | 100-200 | <no value> |
+-----+---------+------------+
```

To make things a bit more readable, especially when doing a lot of template transformations,
you can also load field templates from a yaml file using the `@` symbol.

``` 
❯ glaze json misc/test-data/[123].json \
    --template-field '@misc/template-field-object.yaml' \
    --output json
[
  {
    "barbaz": "6 - 7",
    "foobar": "1"
  },
  {
    "barbaz": "60 - 70",
    "foobar": "10"
  },
  {
    "barbaz": "\u003cno value\u003e - \u003cno value\u003e",
    "foobar": "100"
  }
]
```

- output individual objects or rows as separate files

Glazed provides a variety of "middlewares" with which you can:

- flatten nested objects into rows
- create new fields based on go templates
- filter and reorder columns

```go
of := formatters.NewCSVOutputFormatter()

of.AddTableMiddleware(middlewares.NewFlattenObjectMiddleware())
of.AddTableMiddleware(middlewares.NewFieldsFilterMiddleware(
	[]string{"a", "b"},
	[]string{"c"}
)

for _, obj := range objects {
	of.AddRow(&types.SimpleRow{Hash: obj})
}

s, err := of.Output()
fmt.Println(s)
```

For easy integration into your own tools, glazed provides:

- a simple API for:
  - input processors
  - row and object middlewares
  - output formatters
- bindings and helpers for:
  - go command-line flag parsing
  - cobra and viper libraries
  - YAML driven configuration
- **Command middleware system** for flexible parameter processing:
  - Composable configuration from multiple sources (CLI, files, environment, defaults)
  - Explicit priority control and parameter source traceability
  - Layer-based parameter organization for complex applications
  - See the [Command Middlewares Guide](doc/cmd-middlewares-guide.md) for details

Glazed also comes with the glaze tool which can be use for simple data manipulation
and rich terminal output, leveraging the glazed library.

## Getting started

### Using the glaze command line tool

First, [install the glaze tool](#Installation).

- Show 4-5 cool examples

### Developing with glazed

Write a tiny command line tool:
- if CLI flags can be set up quickly, do that
- generate a random table
- output it using glazed

## Examples

### Output formats

- json [x]
- yaml - #19
- csv [x]
- ascii [x]
- markdown [x]
- html [x]

### File output

- Single file output - #4
- Multi file output - #4

### Flattening structures

- json to rows

### Filtering columns

- filters and fields

### Go template support

- single string template
- multi file templates
- field templates

### Markdown output and templating

- Multi markdown template output with index page
- markdown template file

### Configuration file

- some examples

### Schema documentation

- show how to output schema

## Using glaze as a library

### Middlewares

- ObjectMiddleware
- RowMiddleware
- TableMiddleware

### Formatters

- TableOutputFormatter
- CsvOutputFormatter

### Command Line Integration

- cobra integration [x]
- golang flags - #3
- add support for configuring command line flags (enable / disable / rename)
- viper integration
- calibrate from config files - #17

### Schema documentation

- show how to load different schemas

## The glaze tool

### Installation

Run the `glaze` CLI by using `go run ./cmd/glaze`.

### Import formats

- json / json rows / multiple files - #13
- yaml / multiple files - #14
- csv - #15
- cut / ascii - #16
- sqlite / SQL - #20
- binary parser

### Output flags

## Current RFCs

I keep a list of the current planned features as RFC documents.

- [01 - Flag helpers](doc/rfcs/drafts/01_2022-11-13_flag-helpers.md)
- [02 - Multi-file output](doc/rfcs/drafts/02_2022-11-13_multi-file-output.md)
- [03 - SQLite output](doc/rfcs/drafts/03_2022-11-13_sqlite-output.md)
- [04 - Configuration files](doc/rfcs/drafts/04_2022-11-13_configuration-file.md)
- [05 - Glaze CLI tool](doc/rfcs/done/05_2022-11-19_glaze-cli-tool.md)

## General brainstorm

- documentation for each subsystem

## Future ideas

### Glaze CLI

#### UX

- table app that can hide/show/rename/reorder columns
- markdown rendering with glow - #21
- style aliases (like pretty=oneline for git)
  - maybe styles can also have additional parameters
- sparklines and other shenanigans

#### File Formats

- add support for arbitrary input / output SQL
- add support for inputting binary data and providing a parser
- add support for pcap input
- add support for excel input
- parquet format (and pandas? numpy?)
- excel export
  - annotate excel export with as much metadata as possible

#### Transformation

- add jq support
- search engine  / autocompletion based on known schema
  - use query language to create hyperlinks in output

#### Misc glaze features

- add support for pushing to cloud resources
  - dynamodb
  - S3
  - SQL connectors (see arbitrary input / output SQL)
- add support for serving over HTTP
  - API server to render local data
  - HTML frontend
- serve a local SQL database? meh...
  - useful if you want the user to modify the DB? why not just output sqlite
- cloud / network API output forms, for example to store something in s3 or other databases
  - SQL
  - dynamodb
  - s3
- do we want some kind of transformation DSL / configuration DSL to do
  more complicated things? Definitely not at first, before having the use case for it.
- hyperlinked schema definitions
- collect metadata and event logs to what led to the creation of the data itself
