doc/rfcs/drafts/07_2022-12-03_help-system.md, before:

# Documentation helpers

## Overview

`glaze` doesn't currently provide any examples of usage, and in general 
has a pretty poor documentation system.

Keeping in line with the idea of using glaze as the laboratory for ideas
that the glazed library then makes easily accessible for other developers,
I want to build a way to make it easy to build rich help documentation.

I want to base this on the wolfram mathematica documentation system,
which is the best one I know so far.

## Overall function

The idea is that a developer can easily provide documentation both by
loading it from markdown files (that can be bundled inside the go binary)
or by providing it through passing data structures to the library.

Then, the library provides different easy ways to serve that documentation:

- outputting as part of the command line interface (maybe in a few different ways as well?)
- render markdown documents and present them with glow
- present them as a standalone webserver (godoc style?). This might be a standalone project, tbh.

### Embedding files inside go binaries

The go standard way since 1.16 of bundling static resources inside a binary
is to use the `embed` package, see:

https://stackoverflow.com/questions/13904441/whats-the-best-way-to-bundle-static-resources-in-a-go-program

The template package can directly render files out of embedded resources.

There is also this:
- https://github.com/gobuffalo/packr

But it says to migrate to `embed` anyway.


## Data schema

Here is the different parts of the wolfram documentation:

### Landing page

- landing page with high level topics. This could be the output of `glazed help`
- the landing page also has 2 sections called "workflows" and "resources"

So maybe we can make a hierarchy of sections. The landing page itself is the toplevel
section for everything.

Clicking on one of these sections actually opens a dropdown list with many topics in that
subsection. This is maybe something we could present... In fact, how are we going to link
sections to command line options.

### Linking the data schema to command line help

One way to easily link the sections to the help is to map the slug of each section to
the help verb. So if we have the slug "templates" then `glazed help templates` would render
that documentation page.

Individual command line flags would allow us to toggle tags on and off, so for example:

```shell
glazed help templates --examples
```

would render the sections and subsections of "templates" that have the tag examples. 
This would actually use the glamour library if we want to use markdown.
 
Now, what if we want to link documentation sections to individual verbs? 
We should be able to easily render out the command line needed to actually call up 
a section but by actually passing in the section object, so that we don't need to update
documentation or command help if we happen to rename or move sections around.

On the other hand, we want to render out the help from the command line framework,
since we document individual flags there, inside our documentation. I am going to
concentrate on cobra for now, but this will also apply to configuration files
(for example, rendering different example configuration files without having to keep
those inside the markdown documentation either) and other frameworks later on.

#### Cobra bindings

There is a whole section of the cobra help page that talks about the help command:

- https://github.com/spf13/cobra/blob/main/user_guide.md#help-command

cobra already takes care of the `help <command>` case:

```
❯ go run ./cmd/glaze help json
Format JSON data

Usage:
  glaze json [flags]

Flags:
  -o, --output string            Output format (table, csv, tsv, json, yaml, sqlite) (default "table")
  -f, --output-file string       Output file
      --table-format string      Table format (ascii, markdown, html, csv, tsv) (default "ascii")
      --with-headers             Include headers in output (CSV, TSV) (default true)
      --csv-separator string     CSV separator (default ",")
      --output-as-objects        Output as individual objects instead of JSON array
      --flatten                  Flatten nested fields (after templating)
      --template string          Go Template to use for single string
      --template-field strings   For table output, fieldName:template to create new fields, or @fileName to read field templates from a yaml dictionary
      --use-row-templates        Use row templates instead of column templates
      --fields string            Fields to include in the output, default: all
      --filter string            Fields to remove from output
      --sort-columns             Sort columns alphabetically (default true)
      --input-is-array           Input is an array of objects
  -h, --help                     help for json

```

The first option cobra provides is to be able to group commands in help. There is a 
similar mechanism for completion apparently. I don't really understand it.

But more interestingly, you can provide you own help function, or your own template 
for the normal help function.

cobra draws a distinction between the help command and the usage  function, which 
can also be overridden. I wonder if there is a way to still call the standard help and usage
function when overriding, so that we can just append our own stuff.

Finally, we can override the suggestions function when nothing matching is found. I wonder if 
this is something we should provide as well, or some like "apropos" suggestion service. 
It's probably easiest to just link topics of interest to the different commands we have at our 
disposal.

From reading the cobra source, this is the default help command, which we can capture up front
by calling `rootCmd.HelpFunc()`. It looks like we might be able to override this *per* command 
as well?

```go
package cobra

func (c *Command) HelpFunc() func(*Command, []string) {
	if c.helpFunc != nil {
		return c.helpFunc
	}
	if c.HasParent() {
		return c.Parent().HelpFunc()
	}
	return func(c *Command, a []string) {
		c.mergePersistentFlags()
		// The help should be sent to stdout
		// See https://github.com/spf13/cobra/issues/1002
		err := tmpl(c.OutOrStdout(), c.HelpTemplate(), c)
		if err != nil {
			c.PrintErrln(err)
		}
	}
}
```

This is how the template is rendered, which should give us some helpful insight. 

The template seems to take the command itself as data, I guess it looks up the 
methods  and fields and makes those available?

```go
package cobra

var templateFuncs = template.FuncMap{
	"trim":                    strings.TrimSpace,
	"trimRightSpace":          trimRightSpace,
	"trimTrailingWhitespaces": trimRightSpace,
	"appendIfNotPresent":      appendIfNotPresent,
	"rpad":                    rpad,
	"gt":                      Gt,
	"eq":                      Eq,
}

// tmpl executes the given template text on data, writing the result to w.
func tmpl(w io.Writer, text string, data interface{}) error {
	t := template.New("top")
	t.Funcs(templateFuncs)
	template.Must(t.Parse(text))
	return t.Execute(w, data)
}
```

Let's look at the default template:

```go
package cobra

func (c *Command) UsageTemplate() string {
	if c.usageTemplate != "" {
		return c.usageTemplate
	}

	if c.HasParent() {
		return c.parent.UsageTemplate()
	}
	return `Usage:{{if .Runnable}}
  {{.UseLine}}{{end}}{{if .HasAvailableSubCommands}}
  {{.CommandPath}} [command]{{end}}{{if gt (len .Aliases) 0}}

Aliases:
  {{.NameAndAliases}}{{end}}{{if .HasExample}}

Examples:
{{.Example}}{{end}}{{if .HasAvailableSubCommands}}{{$cmds := .Commands}}{{if eq (len .Groups) 0}}

Available Commands:{{range $cmds}}{{if (or .IsAvailableCommand (eq .Name "help"))}}
  {{rpad .Name .NamePadding }} {{.Short}}{{end}}{{end}}{{else}}{{range $group := .Groups}}

{{.Title}}{{range $cmds}}{{if (and (eq .GroupID $group.ID) (or .IsAvailableCommand (eq .Name "help")))}}
  {{rpad .Name .NamePadding }} {{.Short}}{{end}}{{end}}{{end}}{{if not .AllChildCommandsHaveGroup}}

Additional Commands:{{range $cmds}}{{if (and (eq .GroupID "") (or .IsAvailableCommand (eq .Name "help")))}}
  {{rpad .Name .NamePadding }} {{.Short}}{{end}}{{end}}{{end}}{{end}}{{end}}{{if .HasAvailableLocalFlags}}

Flags:
{{.LocalFlags.FlagUsages | trimTrailingWhitespaces}}{{end}}{{if .HasAvailableInheritedFlags}}

Global Flags:
{{.InheritedFlags.FlagUsages | trimTrailingWhitespaces}}{{end}}{{if .HasHelpSubCommands}}

Additional help topics:{{range .Commands}}{{if .IsAdditionalHelpTopicCommand}}
  {{rpad .CommandPath .CommandPathPadding}} {{.Short}}{{end}}{{end}}{{end}}{{if .HasAvailableSubCommands}}

Use "{{.CommandPath}} [command] --help" for more information about a command.{{end}}
`
}
```

Interesting that it seems to look up the parent command first? I guess that's to check if the parent
template was overloaded, because really the final resort is a hardcoded template.

So this makes it pretty powerful for us to pass in say a cobra command to 
a markdown template in the subsection if we want as well, 
and we don't really need to make it generic either, we can
add the fact that it is a template to the template itself, and pass 
data in the render context, and a bunch of templateFunctions.

#### The actual cobra help command

This is the default help command provided by cobra. If we want to provide our own, and
still show the help for the existing commands without having to completely write our own version,
we need to implement something similar, or reuse the existing command as a helper:

```go
package cobra

    c.helpCommand = &Command{
        Use:   "help [command]",
        Short: "Help about any command",
        Long: `Help provides help for any command in the application.
Simply type ` + c.Name() + ` help [path to command] for full details.`,
        ValidArgsFunction: func(c *Command, args []string, toComplete string) ([]string, ShellCompDirective) {
            var completions []string
            cmd, _, e := c.Root().Find(args)
            if e != nil {
                return nil, ShellCompDirectiveNoFileComp
            }
            if cmd == nil {
                // Root help command.
                cmd = c.Root()
            }
            for _, subCmd := range cmd.Commands() {
                if subCmd.IsAvailableCommand() || subCmd == cmd.helpCommand {
                    if strings.HasPrefix(subCmd.Name(), toComplete) {
                        completions = append(completions, fmt.Sprintf("%s\t%s", subCmd.Name(), subCmd.Short))
                    }
                }
            }
            return completions, ShellCompDirectiveNoFileComp
        },
        Run: func(c *Command, args []string) {
            cmd, _, e := c.Root().Find(args)
            if cmd == nil || e != nil {
                c.Printf("Unknown help topic %#q\n", args)
                CheckErr(c.Root().Usage())
            } else {
                cmd.InitDefaultHelpFlag()    // make possible 'help' flag to be shown
                cmd.InitDefaultVersionFlag() // make possible 'version' flag to be shown
                CheckErr(cmd.Help())
            }
        },
        GroupID: c.helpCommandGroupID,
		
```

#### Potential cobra help outputs

The standard output of the help command is:

``` 
glaze is a tool to format structured data

Usage:
  glaze [command]

Available Commands:
  completion  Generate the autocompletion script for the specified shell
  help        Help about any command or topic
  json        Format JSON data
  yaml        Format YAML data
```

and for a single command:

``` 
Format JSON data

Usage:
  glaze json [flags]

Flags:
  -o, --output string            Output format (table, csv, tsv, json, yaml, sqlite) (default "table")
  -f, --output-file string       Output file
      --table-format string      Table format (ascii, markdown, html, csv, tsv) (default "ascii")
      --with-headers             Include headers in output (CSV, TSV) (default true)
      --csv-separator string     CSV separator (default ",")
      --output-as-objects        Output as individual objects instead of JSON array
      --flatten                  Flatten nested fields (after templating)
      --template string          Go Template to use for single string
      --template-field strings   For table output, fieldName:template to create new fields, or @fileName to read field templates from a yaml dictionary
      --use-row-templates        Use row templates instead of column templates
      --fields string            Fields to include in the output, default: all
      --filter string            Fields to remove from output
      --sort-columns             Sort columns alphabetically (default true)
      --input-is-array           Input is an array of objects
  -h, --help                     help for json
```

The output of the `help` command should probably be something like:

```
glaze is a tool to format structured data

Usage:
  glaze help [topic|command] [flags]
  
Available Topics:
  templates   Using go templates for formatted output
  ...         ...
  
Help Commands:
  toc         Show table of contents for all help sections
  tags        List all documentation tags
  search      Search for string in documentation
  serve       Run local webserver with browsable version of the documentation
  
glaze Commands:
  completion  Generate the autocompletion script for the specified shell
  help        Help about any command or topic
  json        Format JSON data
  yaml        Format YAML data
  
Flags:
  --examples       Show examples for command or topic
  --tutorials      Show tutorials for command or topic
  --applications   Show real-world use cases (can require additional tools)
  --tags strings   Show only sections matching relevant tags (supports simple * glob)
  --flags strings  Show only sections matching the given flags (supports simple * glob)
  
  
Examples:

  # Show the table of contents 
  glaze help toc
  
  # Show examples for using templates
  glaze help templates --examples
  
  # Show all tutorials
  glaze help toc --tutorials
  
  # Show real world applications of the json command using the --template flag
  glaze help json --applications --flags *template*
```

### Data schema sketch

```plantuml
class Section {
   title
   slug
   content
   subsections
   tags
   showPerDefault
   order
}
```

Tags are there to make it easy to group sections for different contexts, for example
code usage sections would have code tags, etc...

This is in order to make it easy to rearrange the documentation in different ways.

One thing that could be built is "virtual" sections that actually query for a list of subsections
and render those, so that we can easily include all the examples related to a topic.

We could also make sections optional and shown only when one of their tag is actually explicitly
requested, for say advanced usage. This is the `showPerDefault` flag in the section class
above.

### Section types

Potentially we should not have a tree of subsections, but rather just a few distinct top level types
that can then be grouped by. In fact maybe I should look more in depth at the cobra
flags amd command grouping to see how that is done and displayed.

Maybe this could just be a group string for each command, and the order of the groups can be given
separately when configuring the display settings.

If we do a hierarchy of documents, What would that look like? For example the fact that the --template
flag should somehow display the additional topic about templates?

This should probably then show that not only do we need to call `glaze help templates` to access 
that information, but ideally this should be listed under a section "Additional help for flags"
along with the flag that cause the topic to be linked.

Now, as for examples, this would be a subsection maybe? But each example should maybe be its own file
with the individual tags for each flag? Maybe command line examples could be a different format,
not markdown, so that we can verify when examples don't run anymore.

It could be a json file or a markdown with a preface that has the complete command split out so that
we can introspect it, always generate the right tags, and also do a build time rendering of the
results to be included in the doc, but also for example generate the vhs scripts for the docs.

This could be also done programmatically with a `AddExampleSection(cmd, args)` method. Ideally
each example would stand on its own with a little doc. It might be annonying to create a single file 
with all of them however, so maybe a yaml with multiline strings for the markdown would be better?
Or why not both, really.

To come back to section types, I think both approaches (a tree, or toplevel given section types) might
work. I will sleep on it and continue to investigate tomorrow.

### See also support

Individual sections should be able to reference other sections, which I guess should be done using
strings in the metadata, but on the other hand we could also parse links and `[[wiki tags]]` syntax.

### Sibling section ordering

We want to print siblings in a specific order (for example, always use examples before applications).
This should be an additional field in the Section itself.

### Mapping markdown files to the data schema

Each markdown file is a single section. There is a yaml frontmatter that contains:

- slug
- title
- parent sections (because we should be able to link one section to multiple parents)
- tags

## Implementation roadmap

### Render a section from the help commands

As a first step, manually create a section and render it from the cobra help command.

We want to show the additional topics only when the help command is shown, for now.

### Load a section from disk

Implement the functionality to load a section from a markdown file, be it from embed or from disk.
This means we can now also write a longer part of the documentation in markdown, which means
it can then be published both on the github website, and inside the tool itself!

### Properly show help sections on root topic and for subcommands using tags

### Render a section using glamour

Add a dependency to glamour to the mix.
This would also be a preliminary step for https://github.com/wesen/glazed/issues/21 .

### Implement subsections

We can now concentrate on implement the actual sections functionality, with subsections, 
default visibility, etc...

### Bind documentation sections to flags and commands

Now we want to bind sections to flags and vice versa. Flag usage documentation should probably be
kept close to the flags themselves? 

Also look into the possibility of using these examples so that we can actually run and render them as part
of the build process.

## Brainstorm

This is just a section to write down some of the wilder ideas that might not really make sense:

- Render all the documentation to disk so that it can be printed or put in a static site?
- Allow templates as input files, which can be filled with runtime data?
  - For example, as a way to provide the actual flags for certain things, or the example output of certain commands?
  - Or for generating help time data schema markdown files <- now that's actually useful
  - See https://github.com/wesen/glazed/issues/33
- We should add a quick search (doesn't need the fanciest UI) to search through all the documentation using
  - https://github.com/blevesearch/bleve

Commit message:

:memo: Write a lot of brainstorming about the help structure before actually moving on to implementation

doc/rfcs/drafts/07_2022-12-03_help-system.md, after:

# Documentation helpers

## Overview

`glaze` doesn't currently provide any examples of usage, and in general 
has a pretty poor documentation system.

Keeping in line with the idea of using glaze as the laboratory for ideas
that the glazed library then makes easily accessible for other developers,
I want to build a way to make it easy to build rich help documentation.

I want to base this on the wolfram mathematica documentation system,
which is the best one I know so far.

## Overall function

The idea is that a developer can easily provide documentation both by
loading it from markdown files (that can be bundled inside the go binary)
or by providing it through passing data structures to the library.

Then, the library provides different easy ways to serve that documentation:

- outputting as part of the command line interface (maybe in a few different ways as well?)
- render markdown documents and present them with glow
- present them as a standalone webserver (godoc style?). This might be a standalone project, tbh.

### Embedding files inside go binaries

The go standard way since 1.16 of bundling static resources inside a binary
is to use the `embed` package, see:

https://stackoverflow.com/questions/13904441/whats-the-best-way-to-bundle-static-resources-in-a-go-program

The template package can directly render files out of embedded resources.

There is also this:
- https://github.com/gobuffalo/packr

But it says to migrate to `embed` anyway.


## Data schema

Here is the different parts of the wolfram documentation:

### Landing page

- landing page with high level topics. This could be the output of `glazed help`
- the landing page also has 2 sections called "workflows" and "resources"

So maybe we can make a hierarchy of sections. The landing page itself is the toplevel
section for everything.

Clicking on one of these sections actually opens a dropdown list with many topics in that
subsection. This is maybe something we could present... In fact, how are we going to link
sections to command line options.

### Linking the data schema to command line help

One way to easily link the sections to the help is to map the slug of each section to
the help verb. So if we have the slug "templates" then `glazed help templates` would render
that documentation page.

Individual command line flags would allow us to toggle tags on and off, so for example:

```shell
glazed help templates --examples
```

would render the sections and subsections of "templates" that have the tag examples. 
This would actually use the glamour library if we want to use markdown.
 
Now, what if we want to link documentation sections to individual verbs? 
We should be able to easily render out the command line needed to actually call up 
a section but by actually passing in the section object, so that we don't need to update
documentation or command help if we happen to rename or move sections around.

On the other hand, we want to render out the help from the command line framework,
since we document individual flags there, inside our documentation. I am going to
concentrate on cobra for now, but this will also apply to configuration files
(for example, rendering different example configuration files without having to keep
those inside the markdown documentation either) and other frameworks later on.

#### Cobra bindings

There is a whole section of the cobra help page that talks about the help command:

- https://github.com/spf13/cobra/blob/main/user_guide.md#help-command

cobra already takes care of the `help <command>` case:

```
❯ go run ./cmd/glaze help json
Format JSON data

Usage:
  glaze json [flags]

Flags:
  -o, --output string            Output format (table, csv, tsv, json, yaml, sqlite) (default "table")
  -f, --output-file string       Output file
      --table-format string      Table format (ascii, markdown, html, csv, tsv) (default "ascii")
      --with-headers             Include headers in output (CSV, TSV) (default true)
      --csv-separator string     CSV separator (default ",")
      --output-as-objects        Output as individual objects instead of JSON array
      --flatten                  Flatten nested fields (after templating)
      --template string          Go Template to use for single string
      --template-field strings   For table output, fieldName:template to create new fields, or @fileName to read field templates from a yaml dictionary
      --use-row-templates        Use row templates instead of column templates
      --fields string            Fields to include in the output, default: all
      --filter string            Fields to remove from output
      --sort-columns             Sort columns alphabetically (default true)
      --input-is-array           Input is an array of objects
  -h, --help                     help for json

```

The first option cobra provides is to be able to group commands in help. There is a 
similar mechanism for completion apparently. I don't really understand it.

But more interestingly, you can provide you own help function, or your own template 
for the normal help function.

cobra draws a distinction between the help command and the usage  function, which 
can also be overridden. I wonder if there is a way to still call the standard help and usage
function when overriding, so that we can just append our own stuff.

Finally, we can override the suggestions function when nothing matching is found. I wonder if 
this is something we should provide as well, or some like "apropos" suggestion service. 
It's probably easiest to just link topics of interest to the different commands we have at our 
disposal.

From reading the cobra source, this is the default help command, which we can capture up front
by calling `rootCmd.HelpFunc()`. It looks like we might be able to override this *per* command 
as well?

```go
package cobra

func (c *Command) HelpFunc() func(*Command, []string) {
	if c.helpFunc != nil {
		return c.helpFunc
	}
	if c.HasParent() {
		return c.Parent().HelpFunc()
	}
	return func(c *Command, a []string) {
		c.mergePersistentFlags()
		// The help should be sent to stdout
		// See https://github.com/spf13/cobra/issues/1002
		err := tmpl(c.OutOrStdout(), c.HelpTemplate(), c)
		if err != nil {
			c.PrintErrln(err)
		}
	}
}
```

This is how the template is rendered, which should give us some helpful insight. 

The template seems to take the command itself as data, I guess it looks up the 
methods  and fields and makes those available?

```go
package cobra

var templateFuncs = template.FuncMap{
	"trim":                    strings.TrimSpace,
	"trimRightSpace":          trimRightSpace,
	"trimTrailingWhitespaces": trimRightSpace,
	"appendIfNotPresent":      appendIfNotPresent,
	"rpad":                    rpad,
	"gt":                      Gt,
	"eq":                      Eq,
}

// tmpl executes the given template text on data, writing the result to w.
func tmpl(w io.Writer, text string, data interface{}) error {
	t := template.New("top")
	t.Funcs(templateFuncs)
	template.Must(t.Parse(text))
	return t.Execute(w, data)
}
```

Let's look at the default template:

```go
package cobra

func (c *Command) UsageTemplate() string {
	if c.usageTemplate != "" {
		return c.usageTemplate
	}

	if c.HasParent() {
		return c.parent.UsageTemplate()
	}
	return `Usage:{{if .Runnable}}
  {{.UseLine}}{{end}}{{if .HasAvailableSubCommands}}
  {{.CommandPath}} [command]{{end}}{{if gt (len .Aliases) 0}}

Aliases:
  {{.NameAndAliases}}{{end}}{{if .HasExample}}

Examples:
{{.Example}}{{end}}{{if .HasAvailableSubCommands}}{{$cmds := .Commands}}{{if eq (len .Groups) 0}}

Available Commands:{{range $cmds}}{{if (or .IsAvailableCommand (eq .Name "help"))}}
  {{rpad .Name .NamePadding }} {{.Short}}{{end}}{{end}}{{else}}{{range $group := .Groups}}

{{.Title}}{{range $cmds}}{{if (and (eq .GroupID $group.ID) (or .IsAvailableCommand (eq .Name "help")))}}
  {{rpad .Name .NamePadding }} {{.Short}}{{end}}{{end}}{{end}}{{if not .AllChildCommandsHaveGroup}}

Additional Commands:{{range $cmds}}{{if (and (eq .GroupID "") (or .IsAvailableCommand (eq .Name "help")))}}
  {{rpad .Name .NamePadding }} {{.Short}}{{end}}{{end}}{{end}}{{end}}{{end}}{{if .HasAvailableLocalFlags}}

Flags:
{{.LocalFlags.FlagUsages | trimTrailingWhitespaces}}{{end}}{{if .HasAvailableInheritedFlags}}

Global Flags:
{{.InheritedFlags.FlagUsages | trimTrailingWhitespaces}}{{end}}{{if .HasHelpSubCommands}}

Additional help topics:{{range .Commands}}{{if .IsAdditionalHelpTopicCommand}}
  {{rpad .CommandPath .CommandPathPadding}} {{.Short}}{{end}}{{end}}{{end}}{{if .HasAvailableSubCommands}}

Use "{{.CommandPath}} [command] --help" for more information about a command.{{end}}
`
}
```

Interesting that it seems to look up the parent command first? I guess that's to check if the parent
template was overloaded, because really the final resort is a hardcoded template.

So this makes it pretty powerful for us to pass in say a cobra command to 
a markdown template in the subsection if we want as well, 
and we don't really need to make it generic either, we can
add the fact that it is a template to the template itself, and pass 
data in the render context, and a bunch of templateFunctions.

#### The actual cobra help command

This is the default help command provided by cobra. If we want to provide our own, and
still show the help for the existing commands without having to completely write our own version,
we need to implement something similar, or reuse the existing command as a helper:

```go
package cobra

    c.helpCommand = &Command{
        Use:   "help [command]",
        Short: "Help about any command",
        Long: `Help provides help for any command in the application.
Simply type ` + c.Name() + ` help [path to command] for full details.`,
        ValidArgsFunction: func(c *Command, args []string, toComplete string) ([]string, ShellCompDirective) {
            var completions []string
            cmd, _, e := c.Root().Find(args)
            if e != nil {
                return nil, ShellCompDirectiveNoFileComp
            }
            if cmd == nil {
                // Root help command.
                cmd = c.Root()
            }
            for _, subCmd := range cmd.Commands() {
                if subCmd.IsAvailableCommand() || subCmd == cmd.helpCommand {
                    if strings.HasPrefix(subCmd.Name(), toComplete) {
                        completions = append(completions, fmt.Sprintf("%s\t%s", subCmd.Name(), subCmd.Short))
                    }
                }
            }
            return completions, ShellCompDirectiveNoFileComp
        },
        Run: func(c *Command, args []string) {
            cmd, _, e := c.Root().Find(args)
            if cmd == nil || e != nil {
                c.Printf("Unknown help topic %#q\n", args)
                CheckErr(c.Root().Usage())
            } else {
                cmd.InitDefaultHelpFlag()    // make possible 'help' flag to be shown
                cmd.InitDefaultVersionFlag() // make possible 'version' flag to be shown
                CheckErr(cmd.Help())
            }
        },
        GroupID: c.helpCommandGroupID,
		
```

#### Potential cobra help outputs

The standard output of the help command is:

``` 
glaze is a tool to format structured data

Usage:
  glaze [command]

Available Commands:
  completion  Generate the autocompletion script for the specified shell
  help        Help about any command or topic
  json        Format JSON data
  yaml        Format YAML data
```

and for a single command:

``` 
Format JSON data

Usage:
  glaze json [flags]

Flags:
  -o, --output string            Output format (table, csv, tsv, json, yaml, sqlite) (default "table")
  -f, --output-file string       Output file
      --table-format string      Table format (ascii, markdown, html, csv, tsv) (default "ascii")
      --with-headers             Include headers in output (CSV, TSV) (default true)
      --csv-separator string     CSV separator (default ",")
      --output-as-objects        Output as individual objects instead of JSON array
      --flatten                  Flatten nested fields (after templating)
      --template string          Go Template to use for single string
      --template-field strings   For table output, fieldName:template to create new fields, or @fileName to read field templates from a yaml dictionary
      --use-row-templates        Use row templates instead of column templates
      --fields string            Fields to include in the output, default: all
      --filter string            Fields to remove from output
      --sort-columns             Sort columns alphabetically (default true)
      --input-is-array           Input is an array of objects
  -h, --help                     help for json
```

The output of the `help` command should probably be something like:

```
glaze is a tool to format structured data

Usage:
  glaze help [topic|command] [flags]
  
Available Topics:
  templates   Using go templates for formatted output
  ...         ...
  
Help Commands:
  toc         Show table of contents for all help sections
  tags        List all documentation tags
  search      Search for string in documentation
  serve       Run local webserver with browsable version of the documentation
  
glaze Commands:
  completion  Generate the autocompletion script for the specified shell
  help        Help about any command or topic
  json        Format JSON data
  yaml        Format YAML data
  
Flags:
  --examples       Show examples for command or topic
  --tutorials      Show tutorials for command or topic
  --applications   Show real-world use cases (can require additional tools)
  --tags strings   Show only sections matching relevant tags (supports simple * glob)
  --flags strings  Show only sections matching the given flags (supports simple * glob)
  
  
Examples:

  # Show the table of contents 
  glaze help toc
  
  # Show examples for using templates
  glaze help templates --examples
  
  # Show all tutorials
  glaze help toc --tutorials
  
  # Show real world applications of the json command using the --template flag
  glaze help json --applications --flags *template*
```

Looking at the above, and if we want to reuse the output of the root command, it's 
actually probablye best to just start designing our own template data format instead 
of trying to capitalize on the existing templates and helpers. 

### Data schema sketch

```plantuml
class Section {
   title
   slug
   content
   subsections
   tags
   showPerDefault
   order
}
```

Tags are there to make it easy to group sections for different contexts, for example
code usage sections would have code tags, etc...

This is in order to make it easy to rearrange the documentation in different ways.

One thing that could be built is "virtual" sections that actually query for a list of subsections
and render those, so that we can easily include all the examples related to a topic.

We could also make sections optional and shown only when one of their tag is actually explicitly
requested, for say advanced usage. This is the `showPerDefault` flag in the section class
above.

### Section types

Potentially we should not have a tree of subsections, but rather just a few distinct top level types
that can then be grouped by. In fact maybe I should look more in depth at the cobra
flags amd command grouping to see how that is done and displayed.

Maybe this could just be a group string for each command, and the order of the groups can be given
separately when configuring the display settings.

If we do a hierarchy of documents, What would that look like? For example the fact that the --template
flag should somehow display the additional topic about templates?

This should probably then show that not only do we need to call `glaze help templates` to access 
that information, but ideally this should be listed under a section "Additional help for flags"
along with the flag that cause the topic to be linked.

Now, as for examples, this would be a subsection maybe? But each example should maybe be its own file
with the individual tags for each flag? Maybe command line examples could be a different format,
not markdown, so that we can verify when examples don't run anymore.

It could be a json file or a markdown with a preface that has the complete command split out so that
we can introspect it, always generate the right tags, and also do a build time rendering of the
results to be included in the doc, but also for example generate the vhs scripts for the docs.

This could be also done programmatically with a `AddExampleSection(cmd, args)` method. Ideally
each example would stand on its own with a little doc. It might be annonying to create a single file 
with all of them however, so maybe a yaml with multiline strings for the markdown would be better?
Or why not both, really.

To come back to section types, I think both approaches (a tree, or toplevel given section types) might
work. I will sleep on it and continue to investigate tomorrow.

### See also support

Individual sections should be able to reference other sections, which I guess should be done using
strings in the metadata, but on the other hand we could also parse links and `[[wiki tags]]` syntax.

### Sibling section ordering

We want to print siblings in a specific order (for example, always use examples before applications).
This should be an additional field in the Section itself.

### Mapping markdown files to the data schema

Each markdown file is a single section. There is a yaml frontmatter that contains:

- slug
- title
- parent sections (because we should be able to link one section to multiple parents)
- tags

## Implementation roadmap

### Render a section from the help commands

As a first step, manually create a section and render it from the cobra help command.

We want to show the additional topics only when the help command is shown, for now.

### Load a section from disk

Implement the functionality to load a section from a markdown file, be it from embed or from disk.
This means we can now also write a longer part of the documentation in markdown, which means
it can then be published both on the github website, and inside the tool itself!

### Properly show help sections on root topic and for subcommands using tags

### Render a section using glamour

Add a dependency to glamour to the mix.
This would also be a preliminary step for https://github.com/wesen/glazed/issues/21 .

### Implement subsections

We can now concentrate on implement the actual sections functionality, with subsections, 
default visibility, etc...

### Bind documentation sections to flags and commands

Now we want to bind sections to flags and vice versa. Flag usage documentation should probably be
kept close to the flags themselves? 

Also look into the possibility of using these examples so that we can actually run and render them as part
of the build process.

## Brainstorm

This is just a section to write down some of the wilder ideas that might not really make sense:

- Render all the documentation to disk so that it can be printed or put in a static site?
- Allow templates as input files, which can be filled with runtime data?
  - For example, as a way to provide the actual flags for certain things, or the example output of certain commands?
  - Or for generating help time data schema markdown files <- now that's actually useful
  - See https://github.com/wesen/glazed/issues/33
- We should add a quick search (doesn't need the fanciest UI) to search through all the documentation using
  - https://github.com/blevesearch/bleve
